Merely recognizing the nature of the mind or the river will not bring the full liberation, full
bloom.
Understanding is a used realization. Generally, there is practice lineage as a dream.
Understanding, realization, and stabilizing, these three are important. At the beginning of time,
we understand.
I think that's good. Good understanding. At the beginning of time, we understand. How we understand
, intellectually understand.
This is not. Actually, we also understand as two understandings.
Undersing, intellectually understanding of realization levels.
But at the beginning of the time, we understood intellectually.
When you receive the teaching, or when you start teaching, then you see, "Oh, that makes sense.
That understands. Oh, I understand how I want to talk."
So that is really understanding, intellectually. You investigate it, analyze it, and you receive
the teaching,
and you also put yourself some degree of the analytic thought and some kind of little bit more
tangible understanding.
That is understanding. Now that understanding, then you're going to put that into practices.
Practice is that, as I already said, with joy and with joy for effort.
But practice. Practice. Oh, exactly. Follow the instructions. Follow us.
Then our embrace. Then go the glimpse of realizations.
Grams and practice. Even you got the glimpse of realizations, still the habit pattern won't go
completely.
It will soften, it is going away, but it's not really going to go away.
Then, finally, it's full-blown realizations.
That is according to the Buddha's teaching. For example, I'm sure you heard that.
Path-paths. Accumulation-path, application-path, seeing-path, meditation-path.
That's among five-path, four-path. What is the teaching said?
In accumulation-path, practitioner will understand.
In that, in the application-path, they're getting some realizations.
Seeing-path, they got full-blown realizations.
In meditation-path, they're stabilizing. Stabilizing that realization.
So this is a practical layout. Again, the greatest teacher, Buddha Chakra Muniz.
And these average people found those certain individuals, highly capable,
instantly they got realizations, instantly.
According to teaching, and very few of the doctor, master, known as Panki Muhanggung.
Panki Muhanggung. And he was so old. Old already at that time.
I'm sure many of you heard that story. I've met him, and Katie Parnishan, I've met him.
I'm sure many of the other great master makers have heard that.
Panki Muhanggung was so old and at the same time, one old man.
He's come from Eastern Tibet. He heard the repetition of the great zokimas, the dero-chan of Tibet.
Dero-chan of Tibet. He heard this human tongue.
And he was suffering because he's so old, he has every sense of everything also played.
At the same time, his relatives and family members are also not so nice to him.
They have all those warm troubles, covers. But he heard that time, the repetition and good things
about Dero-chan.
He always thought, "When I can meet him, if I'm young, I have to go, I like to meet him,
but I'm old and can't travel, and to see him when I can meet him."
But finally, Dero-chan is in Eastern Tibet. In time, he's returning back to Central Tibet.
On the path he waited, he heard Dero-chan has come. He waited on the road.
He asked the family member to support and try to where Dero-chan has traveled, but that path, he
waited.
And the moment is, she's so excited and happy.
"Please, great teacher, give me teaching. I'm old, I'm fever, I won't know how long I will stay,
but I like to receive that great teaching I heard you give me. Will you give me teaching?"
And Dero-chan saw his perfectly high cup of blood practice, practice.
And Dero-chan again, Dero-chan teaches, Dero-chan teaches, Dero-chan teaches.
And he was so excited, so happy. The moment he received, in the teaching he said that,
in history, he had so long time, Dero-chan, he helped by receiving his teaching.
And Dero-chan also gave him that meditation support, because his posture, he cannot be possible.
And there is strength, that push of his chains, it was called, Dero-chan.
And he also gave instructions to use the meditation, but that he cannot stay in the posture.
So he used those techniques, he meditated, he reached, I said that there was the right body, very
soon.
He was one of the first of the great masters of the Dzokhi, Dzokhi disciple, but from Dero-chan.
One of the leading Dzokhi lineage masters, lineage models.
And through his, from him, and then continued succession of the seven generations,
that his, his disciple, their disciple, one after the other, seven generations, they got rainbow
boarders.
So where, they said, Pang of Hong Kong, who is considered one of the great, highly capable
practices,
highly capable individuals. So certain individuals can reach enlightenment, very good.
While from master, while from qualified teacher, qualified student,
and qualified teacher, all that became, and right home time, that's it. You got it. You get it
right.
But every ripple takes time. When it takes time, what needs?
As I said, joyful effort and joy. And continue keeping the instructions in the heart and mind, and
follow.
Surely, we will reach this connection, as all enlightenment, all those great masters, one after
another.
One after another. It's not just a story of 800 years ago, or 1,000 years ago, 2,000 years ago.
It is continuous evidence of all those great practices.
Now we call the masters, but they're not born with masters.
They're born as dedicated, dedicated practitioners, dedicated loyalty practitioners.
Practicing, keeping close heart, and read the life story of the great master, Maharaj.
He was a highly capable individual. Yet, how much he put effort in a life.
In a life, this is not just a malaria, all these three, Lomchimba, too.
Lomchimba is highly enlightened statement, but yet, how long he put also effort, joyful effort, med
itative practices.
Lomchimba is one of the highest scholars, intellectual masters in the Buddhist history.
Truth, or maybe every aspect of it, or maybe every country, he can be one of the greatest scholars
in the world.
But yet, when he has received the teaching, intellectually, he knows everything.
He started, he become known as omniscient, intellectually, but to receive the instructions,
he met, contacted him with a qualified teacher, and received the teachings.
Teaching, he observed it hard, and practiced it.
Lomchimba's teaching said, in his story, Lomchimba was external material.
He was very poor, really poor, mainly he was able to sustain his ritual food.
Because his family is also poor, many times in Italy, those practices were supported by the family.
Family, Lomchimba was really quite poor, poor.
But yet, his courage and commitment, he continually stayed with Lomchimba for six years,
deceiving all the teachings, with his tokens, the lineage blessings.
And more than time, he would think, oh, he is so a scholar, so knows everything,
why he had to stay that long with that great masters.
But yet, he stayed.
And then he deserved all the teachings.
Then he put that into practices.
But at this time, he was also poor, material, poor.
And knowledge, realization, they were rich, very rich, multimillion of billionaires, definitely.
But yet, material is poor.
And what he did, Lomchimba has only one bag.
One bag, then a big bag of the yap hair, yap hair, big bag made of yap hair.
This was his cloth, this was his blanket, this was his cushion.
He stayed in high altitude in a winter time, winter, in summer, whatever.
He stayed with that bag.
And practicing, meditating.
Then Lomchimba become the great Lomchimba.
Lomchimba become known as second Garab Dorji, homonitansi, Garab Dorji of Tibet.
Truly, one of the great Dzogchi masters, great scholars, great realization beings.
And yet, yet, full of love and compassion, known to the earth.
That is how great master Lomchimba is.
Even his highly capable and breathtakingness, or highly capable beings, yet he counter that.
That's why. Read other life stories too, Naropa.
Naropa, as of course you all heard his name, I'm sure, many of you know, I know.
Naropa is one of the great master's and scholars in his times,
in the Bhakarma Chilla Monastu University in India.
He said, he is the scholar of the north, north, very famous scholar.
But one time, he heard from the dakkino, the vegan.
You are expert on the world, W-O-R-D, world.
You are expert on the worlds, but you are not expert on the meanings.
And let you know the meaning of the world, contract with Master Thilopa.
Master Thilopa.
And then, at that time, he was already thinking to pursue and meditate.
So with that kind of encourage him, he contract with Thilobas.
And the Thiloba contract, when he contract, and how many?
There is known as 12 big ascetic practices and 24 minor ascetic practices.
That Thilobas did not give immediate teaching, even word of teaching.
In a way, he is making harsh.
More than time, maybe we can tell, oh, he is abusing.
Abusing, taking advantage of all that.
But narrow, but never lingering of his courage and commitment, his devotion, his determinations.
He contract long time.
Final teaching.
Thilobas did not give any particular teachings, and in the teachings,
the final day, he removed his sandal wool, or sandal, the shoe, sandal, right?
Sandal.
And he, right hand, left hand, he wear all the Naropasi discolored color,
and the left hand, the sandal was slippery, and banged to his face.
And he felt unconsciousness.
Unconsciousness.
He felt it all.
When he woke up that unconsciousness, the brilliant realization of the true,
exactly what he is looking for.
It's completely done in the heart, fully. Fully done, fully shined in the heart.
And what Naropa says, or what the Naropa says, I did not give any word to you.
Any word.
Because the Naropa is an expert on words.
Not to give any word.
So they didn't show anything to you.
But he got full realization, burned in his heart.
What the great Master Padra Rinpoche said that, he said,
all during that time, Naropa is purified his obscurations.
This great Master Thilobas, skillfully,
because it looks like all those kinds of torturing there, all the trouble.
But he is purified all his obscurations, and accumulating madness,
serving to the teachers.
Knowing exactly what teachers has to do, has to do.
And then he got a realization.
What's going on?
My time is stopped.
(Laughter)
11.55.
11.55. Okay, good timing, I remind you.
(Laughter)
And so that's what it really is.
For that reason, for every individual, we continually really need,
we need joyful effort, courage and commitment,
with loyalty and practicing, with them.
And so then, all that.
In order to do that, he said, all the activities of the three doors,
all through an activity of the mundane activity completely, can't relate.
Just stand yourself, and then spend your time to the practices.
Practices.
Practices, and those are said here, nine different things.
Three doors, or three, three here.
And it's a Tibet word, three door, go some, go some in three doors.
Three doors is a metaphor for the body, speech, and mind,
because these three are the passage of the positive and the negative,
but therefore used in, again, of course, with a teaching,
teaching is called go some.
So that the activity of the body is big, gross activity of body,
middle activity of the body, and it's very small, minor activity of the body,
and it's pretty same with those are nine.
So how to put that inside, and put in time to practices.
And when you put practices, then again here, more,
and the teachings and the struggles of where we practice,
and everything, what we do, is everything is,
by the duality, is deluded.
And we follow with the delusions one after another,
that we're never going to find undiluted nature.
So therefore, should not have any kind of grasp,
any kind of grasp, we cling in holding, but relax,
and liberate every activity of the six senses.
Activity, six senses I already mentioned earlier,
and you all know mostly, you know, six senses are the senses of the eye,
and the eye, and the conscious,
and the nose, and the tongue, and the body, and the mind,
those are the six senses.
So, then, kind of release that.
If you do that, keep that, then,
then your result, the final zouki result is coming,
coming, and that is known as namjil.
Lord, it is how wonderful, how delightful,
and now that is the result zouki.
Really, I will explain here.
The result zouki, by then, we will get the true,
satisfactory goal, goal right now, for now, and for future.
When you got that realization, that true goal,
and achievement of that realization,
then the whole, the future, those struggling situation,
or passages, such as Vardhava, and lottery, Lord Ramsa,
or even Samsara, is just only, only a million names.
There's nothing to be worried.
You reach to the like, unexhorted, free from all,
the conceptual status, and the permanent, great, joyful,
and ordinary nature, the meaning of your own kunduzang.
Then you reach their status.
So, in a way, when you reach there, that moment,
you are saying goodbye to the Samsara.
Goodbye, Samsara.
So, that is really a more resolved arm of the zouki,
a result of the zouki.